God is angry every day at the unrighteous.
Well, that doesn't itch anybody's ears.
Nobody's going to accumulate you for their pastorate, perhaps, unless God gives you away
to preach that truth in such a way as to awaken felt needs, the corresponded real needs, that they'd get met and lead to everlasting joy.
There are some verses in the Bible that just don't play well in today's culture.
God is angry every day at the Enriches is one of them.
But Piper doesn't avoid it.
He shows how, when you truly understand it, a hard truth like this one is the only way to true joy.
I'm Dan Kruver.
In this episode of Light and Truth, John Piper gives us the courage to speak hard words with humble hope.
This message was originally delivered in Wheaton, Illinois at the ACT-3 Reformation Conference on October 28, 1999.
verse 3 of 1 Timothy 4 and this is my first reason for why the issue of courage is on my front burner most places where I'm going these days as well as the Bethlehem conference is all about courage this coming February it's called courage in the Christian ministry the verses verse 3 of chapter 4 the time is coming when people will not endure sound teaching but having itching ears
they will accumulate for themselves teachers to suit their own likings and will turn away from listening to the truth.
That bodes ill for you and it bodes well for seeker-sensitive preaching.
Preaching to felt needs is the easiest thing in the world.
Preaching to create
New felt needs that corresponds to real needs is the hardest thing in the world.
You get that?
The time is coming when people will not endure sound teaching.
Having itching ears, they will accumulate for themselves teachers to suit their own likings.
What does that mean?
How relevant can you get?
It is hard work to preach in such a way as to create felt needs that correspond to real needs.
My daddy is having had surgery at 7 o'clock this morning to whom I will fly in Greenville, South Carolina after a preach here on Sunday morning.
I said to me he's an evangelist preached for 50 years.
It's easy to get people saved.
It's hard to get people lost.
That's an overstatement.
The first one was, but it makes the point.
It's hard to get people lost today.
It's hard to get them lost.
There's a lot of thought that people have so much bad feeling today.
All you need to do is preach to help them feel good and that's
rescue.
It's not rescue because they're not feeling bad because they've offended God.
How many people feel bad in America because they dishonored their Creator by paying no attention to Him?
They feel bad because they're divorced or they feel bad because the kids are leaving home or they feel bad because they've got cancer or they feel bad because they've lost their job.
That's not something we can preach to if we want to preach the gospel.
The problem with human beings is that they're damned.
There's a sign on Highwoth Avenue, and they're all over the Twin Cities.
They're probably here too.
I don't know.
Big black signs with white letters.
I love you.
God.
And I said to Noel the other day after we were coming back from our little day off date down to Cap's barbecue.
I read that, and I said to her in the car,
I think that is a totally misleading thing to say in the Twin Cities.
Because I think what it says, driving down high water avenue, away from the airport, or going the other way toward the airport is, you're okay, I support you, I'm on your side, which is wrong.
God is angry at sinners.
God is angry every day at the unrighteous.
Well, that doesn't itch anybody's ears.
Nobody's going to accumulate you for their pastorate, perhaps, unless God gives you a way to preach that truth in such a way as to awaken felt needs that correspond to real needs.
that then get met and lead to everlasting joy.
I'm a Christian hedonist through and through.
If you ask me to define Christian hedonism or just hedonism as it occurs in that sentence, it is a life devoted to pleasure.
That's all I am.
I'm a dyed in the wool, sold out Christian hedonist.
I live for pleasure.
not 99% pleasure, and not pleasure that lasts only 800 years and then lets you down, but 100% proof pleasure and everlasting pleasure.
And there is one place that can be found, according to Psalm 1611, in thy presence is fullness of joy.
At thy right hand, our pleasures
forevermore, and if that's true, I know what I want.
God.
And I'll do anything to get God.
I'll die to have God.
And you can preach the anger of God in that context and have self-centered sinners awaken to joy, real joy.
So my first reason for talking about courage is that the people that are out there that need the gospel and the people that are in your churches that need the whole counsel of God will get each in years and they'll only want people to tickle them.
Here's another reason.
We live in a culture that is saturated with relativism and subjectivism.
Relativism means there's no absolutes and what's good for you may be good for you doesn't have to be good for me and what's right for you may be right for you but doesn't have to be right for me and what's beautiful for you doesn't have to be beautiful for me what's ugly for you doesn't have to be ugly for me because there is no standard to which we all bow and what I mean by subjectivism is that in that in that bill you
My subjectivity, my subjectivity, is God.
Goddess choice.
I thought again about the title of this component of the conference here, preaching God in a man-centered age.
And I thought about primates first because I watched the end a little while ago.
But then here was my other thought about that piece of the title.
It's really not right if by man you mean corporate humanity.
What you have to mean in order to make it a culturally accurate title is man meaning me.
we used to be the enlightenment was the kind of man centered thing but today it is self-centered the 20th century will be the century of the self it will also be the most violent century and deadly century unless it gets worse in the next one but more people have been slaughtered by man in this century than any other century and it is
Self to the core self magazines name self you got self-esteem, which is the gospel in America and therefore Relativism is a very fitting view of life for those for whom self is God because you're not going to submit to what anybody else is who if they doesn't matter if they're God or man So you can't say man centered in the sense that
What's good for humanity is what I believe in, baloney.
Nobody without God believes what's good for humanity.
They believe in what's good for me.
Now, that's the kind of world we live in.
And you're called upon to do what Tom just said, preach in such a way that it claims to be God's word.
Good night.
You know what that's going to be called?
Arrogance.
We take that word God in the title, preaching God in a man-centered age.
What that means, according to John Armstrong's theology, is preaching the God of the Scriptures, preaching God, not just doorknobs.
My higher power is doorknobs.
or my higher power is whatever.
He means biblical vision of God which says it's this way and not that way.
There are denials as well as affirmations.
It's got contours.
There's character to this God.
He's identifiable.
His name is Jesus.
And if you don't believe in Jesus, you don't have the Father.
He confesses the Son, has the Father also.
He who denies the Son does not have the Father.
Preach that in Temple Israel, on head of an avenue, or just in the hearing of Rabbi Joseph Edelheit, which I did in the newspaper two weeks ago, which is an immediate front burner issue with me.
I mean, you know who got all this started in the Southern Baptist rascals?
bless their hearts.
They're doing a lot of things right these days.
But what they did during Rosh Hashanah, you know what that means, don't you?
Rosh, head, Hashanah, the new year, the highest days of the Jewish calendar.
They put out this public statement that all Southern Baptists, all 15 million of them, should pray for their Jewish friends to believe in Jesus as the Messiah and be saved.
Well that hit the Wall Street Journal, hit every magazine, hit the editorial page of the Minneapolis Star Tribune.
And there was one word for it everywhere, arrogance.
Well, well, well.
I read this editorial.
Where is it here?
I read this editorial in the Tribune.
That's my newspaper.
I live in this city, and I've never had an article published by the Minneapolis Tribune in my life.
I've written letters for years, I've lived there for 25 years, and they've never printed a letter that I've written.
Not one.
So I said to my people, the Sunday after that appeared, I read it to them, part of it, and said why I thought it was tragic, to call arrogant,
the preaching of the gospel to the Jewish people and inviting them to trust their Messiah as arrogant.
And I said, I'm going to write a response to this.
I've never had a response published in my life.
Would you pray?
So we had 1800 people pray and they published it the next Saturday.
So here it is.
This is what it looked like.
They gave it that much space.
Hands, where's the time?
Where's the article?
On the Saturday opinion page.
And I said things like this.
Christianity is defined by Jewish scriptures and the New Testament.
According to the New Testament, Jesus Christ is the fulfillment of all the hopes of Israel.
He is the yes to all God's promises.
He is the Messiah.
You have a bunch of texts.
Actually, just like babblers, they put babblers.
To reject Him is to reject God the Father and to confess Him as Lord of your life is to be reconciled to God.
Whoever denies the Son does not have the Father,
The one who confesses the son has the father also.
I just preached.
They printed it.
That's a miracle.
Well, now the issue of courage and comes.
Because the fallout from that was really quite ugly.
And I'll give you a few tastes.
It is disappeared in the next Saturday.
They always correlate in Saturdays with Saturday.
So this is the response that's coming off.
There's a bunch of them.
It is intolerably patronizing.
To tell adherents of another religion that there's no salvation outside our faith community.
That's one, I am intolerably patronizing.
Another one said, arrogant is about the nicest thing I could think to say about such a belief.
Those are two
I happened to go that week down to southern seminary where good ol' Al Moller got himself in trouble also writing in the Wall Street Journal and the responses that hit Al, Al told me that the viciousness of the criticism he received was worse on this issue than when he took a stand on gay rights and so on.
And the letters in the newspaper, the Louisville Courier Journal,
went like this.
His idolatrous focus on propositional truth is in my judgment a retreat from modernity.
I want people to know that not all Baptists embrace my way or no way approach your religion.
God's light shines for many candles and this Southern Baptist focus is simplistic, insensitive
and arrogant.
And then here's the one that saddened me most.
This was two weeks later.
Our church is downtown Minneapolis.
There's four blocks from the Metrodome.
You can walk to downtown.
And so I'm included in what's called the downtown clergy, which means the old hundred year old churches.
There's a Presbyterian, Westminster, there's St. Mark's Episcopal, and there's the Basilica of St. Mary, and there's
with congregational, all these mainline Protestant and Catholic churches.
I used to eat breakfast with these guys and I stopped going to the meetings and I won't tell you why because it would be indecent.
But they wrote, teamed up, they teamed up to write a letter and all of them signed it.
I'll just read you a piece over here because here's the grievous thing.
the grievous thing.
Here are the shepherds of the leading churches of Minneapolis.
Now they're not the most dynamic churches of Minneapolis.
Those churches are all out in suburbs and we got hundreds of them in the Twin Cities, great churches.
But these are big, ancient, esteemed, if anybody at the newspaper wants a clergy opinion, then go to one of these guys.
And they're leading thousands of people and representing
Jesus Christ.
The relationship of Christians to Jews begins as Reverend John Piper allows in his October 2nd counterpoint with Judaism of Jesus.
But Christianity while it is Judaism's child is not necessarily its fulfillment.
To suggest that Judaism is somehow incomplete without Jesus is as inappropriate as a child saying to a parent, without me your life has no meaning.
Further appeals to New Testament texts as one finds in Reverend Piper's essay, while appropriate for dialogue within the Christian family, do little to further the cause of Christian Jewish amity.
Our two traditions now stand side by side, the one acknowledging its debt to the other, but each appreciative that God has seen fit to bless the world with diverse families of faith.
True interfaith dialogue is possible only when neither of the parties try to win over or save the other.
Such attempts imply an assumed superiority, and that is no basis for real conversation.
That's really sad.
That is really, really sad.
What I'm illustrating is the
relativism of our day, which has penetrated to the heart of most mainline denominations, and is trying to penetrate other denominations as well.
Let me illustrate it with a few quotations from contemporary wise spokesman.
Here's a word from Michael Novak, who won the Templeton Prize for the Advancement of Religion 1994.
He said totalitarianism
as Mussolini defined it, is the willed power unchecked by any regard for truth.
To surrender the claims of truth upon humans is to surrender earth to thugs.
It is to make a mockery of those who endured agonies for truth at the hands of torturers.
Vulgar relativism is an invisible gas, odorless, deadly,
that is now polluting every free society on earth it is a gas that attacks the central nervous system of moral striving the most perilous threat to the free society today therefore is neither political or economic it is the poisonous corrupting culture of relativism so he's coming at it from a political side and saying if anything destroys
society and leads to totalitarianism, it will be relativism.
Back in 1979 there was a law professor Arthur Leff who delivered a lecture at Duke University in which he laid down the torture of his soul in wanting there to be absolutes and knowing that there are no absolutes and what it meant to him.
Let me read you this kind of soul bearing that was most remarkable.
I want to believe and so do you," he said to the students.
I want to believe and so do you in a complete transcendent and imminent set of propositions about right and wrong, findable rules that authoritatively and unambiguously direct us how to live righteously.
I also want to believe and so do you in no such thing, but rather that we are wholly free.
Not only to choose for ourselves what we ought to do, but to decide for ourselves individually and as a species what we ought to be.
What we want, heaven help us, is simultaneously to be perfectly ruled and perfectly free.
That is, at the same time to discover the right and the good and to create it.
Then he closed like this.
All I can say is this, it looks as if we are all we have.
Given what we know about ourselves and each other, this is an extraordinarily unappetizing prospect.
Looking around the world, it appears that if all men are brothers, the ruling model is Cain and Abel.
Neither reason nor love nor even terror seems to have worked to make us good.
And worse than that, there is no reason why anything should.
Only if ethics were something unspeakable by us could law be unnatural and therefore unchallengeable.
As things stand now, everything is up for grabs.
Nevertheless, napalming babies is bad.
Starving the poor is wicked.
Buying and selling each other is depraved.
Those who stood up and denied or died resisting Hitler, Stalin, Amine and Paul Pot in general, Custer II have earned salvation.
Those who acquiesce deserve to be damned.
There is in the world such a thing as evil.
Altogether now says who.
God help us.
That's the end of his talk.
The grand says who?
In this milieu of relativism, which is penetrated to the core of the church, as well as the world, you are going to need courage to preach the truth, the way it ought to be preached.
This means controversy.
I just came through one, Emian one, in my denomination, and frankly, I am stunned at the height to which the avoidance of controversy is elevated as a supreme value.
I am stunned at the implicit, though it would be totally denied,
truthlessness of that value.
Oh, that we would go back and read our Machin from 80 years ago.
Let me read you this.
This is from Machin 1932 in London.
Men tell us that our preaching should be positive, not negative.
Now there's some truth.
It's a lot of truth.
That we can preach the truth without attacking error.
But if we follow that advice, we shall have to close our Bible and desert its teachings.
The New Testament is a polemic book almost from beginning to end.
Some years ago, I was in a company of teachers, which says of the Bible in colleges and other educational institutions of America, one of the most eminent theological professors in the country made an address.
In it, he admitted that there were unfortunate controversies about doctrines in the epistles of Paul, but said he, in effect, the real essence of Paul's teaching is found in the hymn to Christian love in the thirteenth chapter of the first Corinthians.
And we can avoid controversy today if we will only devote the chief attention to that inspiring hymn.
In reply, I am bound to say, that the example was
singularly ill-chosen.
That hymn to Christian love is in the midst of a great polemic passage.
It would never have been written if Paul had been opposed to controversy with error in the church.
It was because his soul was stirred within him by a wrong use of spiritual gifts that he was able to write that glorious hymn.
So it is always in the church.
Every really great Christian utterance, it may almost be said, is born in controversy.
It is when men have felt compelled to take a stand against error that they have risen to the really great heights in the celebration of truth.
So my point here is to say
We have a biblical warning that in the last days or the days will come when there will be itching ears that will accumulate teachers that say what we want to hear.
And therefore, if you say what's the full counsel of God, you may have to bear some consequences.
Therefore, courage, courage.
Thank you for listening to this episode of Light and Truth, where we are committed to providing God-centered preaching to help you see Christ clearly and treasure Him truly.
I'm your host,
Dan Kruver.
On our next episode, John Piper continues our eight-part series, Living and Dying for the Glory of Christ with a message titled, Fear Not, Five Incentives for Courage.
I hope you'll join us.
For more resources, visit desiringgod.org.